The phonon component of thermal diffusivity (D) for eleven compounds (synthetic SrTiO3, SrTiO3:Fe3+, BaTiO3, KTaO3, KNbO3, NdGaO3, YAlO3, YAlO3:Tm, LaAlO3, La0.29Sr0.66Al0.65Ta0.35O3, and natural Ca1.01Mn0.001Fe0.007Ti0.99O3) with various perovskite structures was measured from ambient temperature (T) up to < 2000K using contact-free, laser-flash analysis, from which effects of ballistic radiative transfer were removed. Structural transitions (e.g., orthorhombic to tetragonal) below 800 K were manifest as sharp steps in 1/D. Above 800 K, structural transitions occur over intervals of < 150K. Similarly broad peaks accompany changes from colorless to black, attributable to partial reduction in Ti, Nb, or Ta from contact with graphite coatings. Otherwise, D decreases with increasing T and, if substitutional disorder exists, approaches a constant (Dsat) near 1600 K. Our data are best described as D1 following a low order polynomial in T. Ordered, cubic perovskites occupy a single trend for D(T)1, defining the contribution of the ideal lattice. Distortion, disorder, and polymorphism affect D1 in a manner that is consistent with the damped harmonic oscillator-phonon gas model which relates phonon lifetimes to infrared peak widths. Calculated D-values at ambient and high T agree with measurements. The behavior of D is simple compared to that of thermal conductivity, k = ÁCPD, where Á is density and CP is heat capacity. Combining our data with cryogenic measurements of YAlO3 and LaAlO3 shows that D1 depends on T similarly to CP, consistent with phonon lifetime depending on the density of states but, the best description for D1(T) is a proportionality to ±T from < 0K up to the limit of measurements, where ± is thermal expansivity, a strongly anharmonic property. At low T, D1 due to phonon scattering follows that of CP, generallyT3, so klat = k0+k1T. Defects being present preclude scattering at sample walls, adding a small constant D01 < 0.0001mm2	s as T’0, and an additional contribution of kdfctT3. Forms previously inferred for thermal insulators include systematic errors stemming from ballistic radiative transfer and/or interface resistance. Our results show that optical phonons largely govern heat transport of complex insulators.

aluminium compounds
ballistic transport
barium compounds
calcium compounds
coatings
electronic density of states
graphite
iron
iron compounds
lanthanum compounds
laser materials processing
manganese compounds
phonons
polymorphism
potassium compounds
radiative transfer
solid-state phase transformations
specific heat
strontium compounds
thermal diffusivity
thulium
yttrium compounds
