Single crystal plates of ferrimagnetic yttrium iron garnet (111)-YIG:Si (Y3Fe4.94Si0.06O12) and barium hexaferrite (00.1)-BaM (BaFe12O19) or (00.1)-BaM:Co,Ti (BaFe9.1Co1.4Ti1.5O19) are irradiated with swift heavy ions (3.8 GeV 129Xe or 6.0 GeV 208Pb) in the electronic slowing down regime, above the threshold (H20 keV nm1) of formation of continuous and homogeneous cylindrical amorphous tracks. The modifications of the magnetic properties are studied by 57Fe Mössbauer spectroscopy and ac magnetic permeability measurements versus ion fluence. In the doped crystals having a planar magnetic anisotropy (YIG:Si and BaM:Co,Ti), the room-temperature Mössbauer spectra show that the magnetization is flipped perpendicularly to the sample plane at a critical amorphous fraction around 30% in both compounds. This corresponds to a 90% drop of the measured in-plane magnetic permeability. No such effect is seen in the undoped BaM samples with the axial [00.1] anisotropy. These data are interpreted by a magnetomechanical effect generated by the stress field induced by the amorphous tracks in the sample plane which flips the magnetization along the track-axis direction when the stress-induced anisotropy constant surpasses the pristine crystal anisotropy constant at the critical amorphous fraction. In the case of YIG:Si single crystal, a track-induced anisotropy field around 0.1 T is deduced from the Mössbauer spectra under a magnetic field applied in the sample (111) plane which rotates the magnetization back to the easy 111	 magnetization axis lying near the sample (111) plane in a reversible manner. The magnetic ordering of amorphous YIG:Si below 70 K is also studied by Mössbauer spectroscopy under high magnetic field (5 T). A two-dimensional Bruggeman model used for the calculation of the permeability of the crystal+amorphous track composites yields track-core radii larger by about 40% than the values previously obtained for both compounds by Mössbauer spectroscopy. We think that such discrepancies show that the samples cannot be treated like standard two-phase composites since the undamaged crystal undergoes a variable stress field depending on the damaged fraction. © 2001 American Institute of Physics.

ferrites
magnetic anisotropy
Mossbauer effect
ion beam effects
magnetic permeability
magnetisation
magnetomechanical effects
garnets
silicon
yttrium compounds
barium compounds
