Compressively strained Si0.7Ge0.3 layers were grown on Si(001) by gas-source molecular beam epitaxy from Ge2H6/Si2H6 mixtures at 450
°C. The combination of the relatively low growth temperature and high steady-state hydrogen surface coverage, ¸H=0.52 monolayer, completely suppresses strain-induced roughening and provides extremely flat surfaces with root mean square widths w&lt;1.5	Å for fully coherent layers. These samples were used as the starting point to probe mechanisms that control misfit-dislocation-induced surface roughening (i.e., crosshatch) along 90°-rotated 110	 directions. For film thicknesses t just larger than the critical value for misfit dislocation formation, tcC1000	Å, surface roughness is dominated by single- and multiple-atomic-height steps generated by the motion of threading dislocations associated with interfacial misfits. The surface steps are preferential H desorption sites and the increase in total step length results in a decrease in ¸H on terraces as well as at step edges. The latter effect allows a higher adatom crossing probability at ascending steps, leading to the formation of periodic ridges in response to local strain fields associated with misfit dislocation clusters; w increases from 3.1 Å at t=1350	Å (corresponding to strain relaxation R of 1%) to 27 Å at t=4400	Å (R=78%). Simultaneously, the decrease in ¸H on terraces strongly affects film growth kinetics as the deposition rates increase from 10 Å
min1 with t&lt;tc to C60 Å
min1 with tC14004400	Å. Overall, in films with tr1440	Å (Rr5%), crosshatch is due to surface steps that result from multiple misfit dislocations on single glide planes. At higher film thicknesses (R=2278%), crosshatch becomes dominated by local strain-induced roughening and leads to periodic ridge formation. © 2003 American Institute of Physics. 

Ge-Si alloys
semiconductor materials
silicon
elemental semiconductors
hydrogen
adsorption
desorption
chemical beam epitaxial growth
semiconductor epitaxial layers
semiconductor growth
surface topography
dislocation structure
dislocation motion
surface morphology
