Businesses today are searching for information solutions that enable them to compete in the global marketplace. To minimize risk, these solutions must build on existing investments, permit the best technology to be applied to the problem, and be manageable. Object technology, with its promise of improved productivity and quality in application development, delivers these characteristics but, to date, its deployment in commercial business applications has been limited. One possible reason is the absence of the transaction paradigm, widely used in commercial environments and essential for reliable business applications. For object technology to be a serious contender in the construction of these solutions requires:  technology for transactional objects. In December 1994, the Object Management Group adopted a specification for an object transaction service (OTS). The OTS specifies mechanisms for defining and manipulating transactions. Though derived from the X/Open distributed transaction processing model, OTS contains additional enhancements specifically designed for the object environment. Similar technology from Microsoft appeared at the end of 1995.  methodologies for building new business systems from existing parts. Business process re-engineering is forcing businesses to improve their operations which bring products to market. Workflow computing, when used in conjunction with object wrappers provides tools to both define and track execution of business processes which leverage existing applications and infrastructure.  an execution environment which satisfies the requirements of the operational needs of the business. Transaction processing (TP) monitor technology, though widely accepted for mainframe transaction processing, has yet to enjoy similar success in the client/server marketplace. Instead the database vendors, with their extensive tool suites, dominate. As object brokers mature they will require many of the functions of today's TP monitors. Marrying these two technologies can produce a robust execution environment which offers a superior alternative for building and deploying client/server applications.

Objects
Workflow
transaction processing
