Background: Patients with depressive disorders have limitations in physical and emotional functioning comparable to patients with chronic medical conditions. Personality disorders (PDs) are also known to be associated with functional impairment. Aims: To determine the effects of PDs on the functioning and well-being of patients with major depressive disorder (MDD). Method: In the Collaborative Longitudinal Personality Disorders Study, 668 patients who met criteria for schizotypal, borderline, avoidant, or obsessive-compulsive PDs or for MDD and no PD were assessed with semi-structured interviews at baseline, 6, 12, 24, and 36 months. In this study, 151 patients who met criteria for current MDD at the 36-month follow-up were compared on the basis of the presence (<em>n</em> = 118) or absence (<em>n</em> = 33) of persistent PD. Physical and social/emotional functioning and well-being were assessed using the Medical Outcomes Study (MOS) Short-Form Health Survey (SF-36). These results were compared with those of a sample of patients with MDD seen in the mental health specialty sector who were followed in the Medical Outcomes Study. Results: Patients with MDD and co-occurring PD had significantly more impairment on scales measuring role limitations due to emotional problems, social functioning, and general health perceptions than patients with MDD and no PD. Although patients with MDD and no PD were found to have levels of functioning and well-being that were lower in several domains than those previously reported in depressed patients recruited from mental health settings, patients with MDD and co-occurring PD were found to have much lower levels of functioning in all areas than reported samples. Conclusions: Co-occurring PDs contribute significantly to impairment in social and emotional functioning and reduced well-being in patients with MDD. 

personality disorders
major depressive disorder
Collaborative Longitudinal Personality Disorders Study
functional impairment
well-being
Medical Outcomes Study
Medical Outcomes Study Short-Form Health Survey (SF-36)
