Dementia is a serious and growing problem that presents enormous burdens to patients, their families, and national healthcare systems throughout the world. In the United States, there are currently two classes of psychopharmacologic agents approved for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease: the cholinesterase inhibitors, which are approved for use in patients with mild to moderate disease, and memantine, an N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist, which is approved for treatment of moderate to severe illness. Three cholinesterase inhibitors are in general clinical use, each of which has a distinct pharmacokinetic, pharmacodynamic, and side-effect profile. In addition, there is growing research and clinical evidence of the effectiveness of the cholinesterase inhibitors in patients who are in the more advanced stages of Alzheimer's dementia as well as in patients with other forms of dementia. There are four acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (AChEIs) currently approved for use in the United States, one of which, tacrine, is rarely used because of apparent hepatotoxicity. Donepezil (Aricept), rivastigmine (Exelon), and galantamine (Reminyl) are approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment of mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease (AD). The purpose of this article is to review the AChEIs, including their pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic profiles, the current evidence for their efficacy and safety, and guidelines for their use in dementia and other disorders. The theoretical foundation for use of AChEIs derives from well-documented evidence of presynaptic cholinergic deficits in AD. 1 It has been established that the activity of several neurotransmitter systems, including norepinephrine and acetylcholine (ACh), decline in patients with AD. 2 Research attention was focused especially on acetylcholine because of its association with neurons in the basal forebrain (the nucleus basalis of Meynert) that subserve memory and whose number are known to decline in the course of AD. 3 Early, unsuccessful attempts to alleviate this condition included dietary augmentation of acetylcholine precursors. 4,5 Attention then turned to the AChEIs, which inhibit the degradation of acetylcholine in the intrasynaptic cleft. The first of these, tacrine, while showing clinical efficacy, was poorly tolerated and was associated with cases of hepatotoxicity. 6 Beginning in 1998, three newer generation AChEIs were introduced for the earlier stages of AD, each of which is profiled below. Accumulating evidence of acetylcholine deficiency in both dementia with Lewy bodies 7 and vascular dementia (VaD) 8 raises the possibility that AChEIs will be effective in these conditions as well. 

cholinesterase inhibitor
donepezil
galantamine
rivastigmine
Alzheimer's dementia
Lewy body dementia
vascular dementia
