Treatment of elderly patients with dementia-related behavioral disturbances and depression-related psychosis poses a significant problem, considering patients' frailty and use of polypharmacy for comorbid medical disorders. This case series describes the use of ziprasidone, a novel atypical antipsychotic, in three frail, elderly patients admitted to the hospital for behavioral disturbances secondary to dementia-related illness after their current treatment failed to improve symptoms or produced intolerable side effects. At admission, none of the patients were taking medications contraindicated for use with ziprasidone. In each case, ziprasidone resolved symptoms of agitation, psychosis, depression, and cognitive impairment sufficiently to permit discharge on maintenance therapy to assisted-living facilities or nursing homes. No patient suffered syncope or postural hypotension during treatment with ziprasidone. Electrocardiograms taken on admission and after institution of ziprasidone disclosed minimal increases in the QTc interval or no change from baseline, and no patient had a QTc interval &gt; 500 ms. No drug-drug interactions occurred. Similar results were observed in an additional 53 of 62 elderly patients (aged 64-92 years) admitted to our institution. This experience suggests that ziprasidone is a safe and effective treatment option in elderly individuals who require antipsychotic medication. Dementia-related behavioral disturbances and depression-related psychosis in fragile, elderly patients often present a treatment challenge. Episodes of marked agitation and mood lability, with observed irritability and hostility, are common. Because patients may become combative, even striking or kicking caregivers and nursing home staff, drug therapy is often required. Hallucinations and delusions are also common and provide a further indication for drug therapy. 1 The likelihood that elderly patients are receiving polypharmacy for concomitant diseases must, however, be considered when contemplating the addition of psychotropic agents. Haloperidol is often used in this setting. Although haloperidol is associated with minimal occurrence of anticholinergic effects and hypotension, extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS) are common in this population, especially in patients receiving higher doses. 1-4 As a consequence, the newer atypical antipsychotic agents, with their lower liability for EPS and enhanced efficacy, have gained acceptance in treating dementia-related behavioral disturbances and depression-related psychosis. The fact that they are more broadly effective than conventional agents 5 also holds appeal for use in a patient population with significant affective and cognitive symptoms. Differences among the atypical antipsychotic agents do, however, exist. Clozapine and olanzapine have been associated with weight gain and an adverse impact on the metabolic profile, most often manifested as increases in serum total cholesterol and triglyceride levels and increased insulin resistance. 6-8 Risperidone is more often associated with dose-related orthostatic hypotension, 9 EPS, and serum prolactin elevations 8,10 and can have an adverse impact on the metabolic profile. 11 Ziprasidone, one of the newer atypical agents, has been shown to effectively manage the affective and cognitive symptoms of schizophrenia. 12-14 Like clozapine and quetiapine, it is associated with a very low incidence of movement disorders, the incidence being no greater than that observed with placebo over 12 months' use in hospitalized patients with chronic schizophrenia. 12 Ziprasidone is also distinguished from risperidone and olanzapine by a weight-neutral profile and favorable effects on both glucose tolerance and serum lipids. 15-17 Weight gain, in particular, has been demonstrated to have an adverse effect on quality of life. 18 To date, there have been no published trials on the use of ziprasidone in elderly patients with cognitive impairment. I report here on the use of ziprasidone in three elderly patients with dementia-related behavioral disturbances or depression-related psychosis. In each case, ziprasidone, used alone or in combination with other psychotropic agents, effectively managed the patient's symptoms, while demonstrating good tolerability and cardiovascular safety. These patients were drawn from a larger series of 62 inpatients (mean age 79 years; range 64-92 years), most with mood and behavioral disturbances secondary to dementia. In total, 53 patients responded well to ziprasidone, while experiencing no occurrences of postural hypotension or syncope despite the use of multiple medications. It is important to note at the outset that none of the patients was concomitantly taking medications known to prolong the QT interval, none was identified as having a cardiac disorder associated with prolonged QT intervals, and none had congenital cardiac diseases that predisposed them to QT prolongation. 

ziprasidone
dementia
elderly
depression
atypical antipsychotics
QTc interval
cognitive symptoms
postural hypotension
