Introduction: The prevalence of smoking is high in persons with serious mental illness (SMI) despite associated health risks. Persons with SMI die on average 25 years earlier than the general population and an increased focus on wellness, including smoking cessation, has been a goal of federal, state, and municipal governments. Objectives: The primary objective of this study was to evaluate the effects of smoking cessation on symptom severity in psychiatric inpatients at a New York State psychiatric facility 1 year after a smoke-free policy had been implemented. The secondary objective of this study was to evaluate cardiometabolic risk factors. Methods: A retrospective chart review of 26 adult psychiatric inpatients receiving either clozapine, olanzapine, or both at any time between January 2006 and December 2007 was conducted. In addition to Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) scores and cardiometabolic measures (body weight, body mass index [BMI], and blood pressures before and after implementation of the smoke-free policy), other information collected included age, gender, diagnosis, the frequency of psychiatric medications used on an as-needed (p.r.n.) basis, immediate-need (stat) medication use, medication dosing, number of psychiatric emergencies, Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF) scores, privilege status, and time in special observation. Patients were compared on their own pre- and post-smoking cessation parameters and data were analyzed using a dependent t-test with <em>p</em> &lt; 0.01 chosen as indicating significance. Results: Data analysis revealed a small but statistically significant decrease in GAF scores (<em>p</em> &lt; 0.01), but no other significant difference between values pre- and post-smoking cessation. Conclusion: Analysis demonstrated no change in psychiatric symptomatology or cardiometabolic factors 1 year post-smoking cessation in individuals with schizophrenia taking clozapine, olanzapine, or both. Further investigation is needed before concluding that smoking cessation has no impact on symptoms or on cardiometabolic risk factors. Despite a slight but statistically significant worsening in GAF scores, the health benefits of smoking cessation should continue to form the basis of encouraging smoking cessation in persons with SMI while longer term and methodologically more rigorous assessments on psychiatric and general health status are undertaken. (<em>Journal of Psychiatric Practice</em> 2010;16:75-81) 

clozapine
olanzapine
smoking
psychiatric symptoms
cardiometabolic factors
