Chronic unipolar depression is being increasingly recognized in general psychiatry as a particularly severe form of depressive illness that leads to significant symptomatology, prolonged suffering, and prolonged functional impairment in a variety of domains, including educational/vocational dysfunction as well as interpersonal impairment. Recent research on treatment interventions for adult patients with chronic depressions suggests that standard treatments for depressive illness may need modification to benefit patients with chronic illness. Little attention at this point has been given to the problem of chronic depression in children and adolescents. Many adults with chronic depressive disorders had onset of depression in their childhood or adolescence, making early identification of this form of illness a priority. The authors present a comprehensive review of emerging literature in the assessment, clinical course, and treatment of chronic forms of unipolar depression in youth. They then develop summary recommendations for the assessment and treatment of this type of mood disorder in youth, based on the currently available research and common sense clinical experience. Depressive illness is increasingly being recognized as one of the most serious public health problems both inside and outside the United States. 1 Depression occurs at relatively high rates in all age groups except young children and is associated with significant suffering, functional impairment, and mortality. 2-4 The magnitude of this public health concern is underscored by the fact that suicide is the third leading cause of death among adolescents (ages 15-24) and the sixth leading cause of death in children (ages 5-14). 5 Chronic subtypes of depressive disorders have recently gained increased attention as particularly noxious forms of mental illness that may lead to prolonged and sustained suffering as well as impaired interpersonal, vocational, and social functioning as compared with less sustained forms of depression. 6 In the last few decades, it has been clearly established that children and adolescents can develop depressive disorders that resemble the illness in adults in symptomatic profile and natural history. 7 However, the problem of chronic forms of depressive illness occurring in younger populations has received relatively little attention in the child psychiatry literature. Yet it may prove to be important to take into account symptomatic presentation and course of illness associated with chronic mood disorders at the time of diagnosis to fully understand the clinical problems and risks for subsequent developmental problems in children with chronic depressive illness. These factors may also inform the development of treatment plans for such youth. The purpose of this paper is to review recent literature on the phenomenology and natural history of chronic forms of depression in pediatric populations and to provide practical clinical information concerning the assessment and treatment of these children and adolescents. Although most of the literature in this area has focused on children, adolescents, and adults with dysthymic disorder, it is important to recognize that other forms of chronic unipolar depressive illness exist in all age groups; we will therefore discuss the full spectrum of unipolar illness in the pediatric age range. This article does not cover bipolar depression, which also occurs in pediatric populations. It should be noted that few studies to date have been completed in pediatric populations that can provide solid support for evidence-based treatment recommendations. However, reasonable clinical approaches to this group of patients can be developed by extrapolating information from available studies with adults with chronic depression and from recently published controlled trials of psychotherapy and antidepressant medications for unipolar depressive illness in pediatric populations. 

chronic depression
dysthymic disorder
double depression
children
adolescents
rating scales
cognitive-behavioral therapy
interpersonal therapy
pharmacotherapy
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
combination therapy
