Eating disorders are serious illnesses associated with significant medical and psychological sequelae and, in the case of anorexia nervosa, significant mortality. Established psychotherapies such as cognitive-behavioral therapy and interpersonal therapy are effective for many patients with eating disorders. However, these treatments fail to yield full long-term remission in a substantial number of patients. There is a need for novel psychotherapeutic approaches for patients with eating disorders. The authors review three promising new treatment approaches in the field of eating disorders. Motivational enhancement therapy is based on established motivational principles for treating patients with addictive disorders and has been adapted as an early component of treatment for patients with anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa. Dialectical behavioral therapy was initially developed for the treatment of borderline personality disorder and has been successfully applied to patients with binge eating. A novel form of family therapy, the Maudsley family treatment for adolescents with anorexia nervosa, has been newly manualized, and studies using this treatment are ongoing. For each treatment, the authors review the theory and techniques of treatment and then go on to review existing data on treatment efficacy. Eating disorders, including anorexia nervosa (AN), bulimia nervosa (BN), and binge eating disorder (BED), are serious illnesses associated with significant psychological and medical sequelae, including, in the case of AN, illness-related mortality of as much as 5% per decade. 1 A number of established psychotherapies exist, particularly for BN, including cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) 2 and interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT). 3 These established approaches have also been used, although less extensively, in the treatment of AN and BED. CBT is based on a model of eating disorders that emphasizes the interplay of overvalued ideas regarding weight and shape, as well as strict dieting practices that leave one vulnerable to disordered eating. The CBT therapist focuses on these behavioral and cognitive factors by prescribing regular meals and snacks in order to normalize eating patterns and reduce urges to binge, implementing graduated exposure to feared foods, and working with a patient to change distorted thinking about weight, body image, and food. In contrast, IPT is based on a model that conceptualizes eating disturbances as symptomatic of disturbances in interpersonal functioning, and treatment focuses on identifying and problem-solving interpersonal difficulties in several domains. However, even with a course of expertly delivered CBT or IPT, many patients do not get better. For example, a recent study of the comparative efficacy of CBT and IPT for BN found that the two treatments yielded remission rates of only 48% and 28%, and full recovery rates of only 29% and 6% respectively. 4 For AN, CBT has been studied mostly for relapse prevention in weight-restored patients 5 and, while more effective than nutritional counseling, it is clearly not successful in all cases. In the case of BED, recent studies suggest that both CBT and IPT are effective for binge suppression but not weight loss, 6 and longer-term studies suggest that there may be some deterioration over time. 7 Recent evidence-based reviews of treatment for BN and AN suggest that: 1) the strongest evidence for psychotherapeutic benefit in BN is for CBT; 2) there exists limited evidence that other psychotherapies for BN are effective; 3) even following a course of CBT, approximately 50% of patients with BN remain unrecovered; 4) although there is limited evidence supporting the effectiveness of various psychotherapies for AN compared with treatment as usual, there is insufficient evidence to recommend any one psychotherapy as the treatment of choice. 8,9 An additional consideration in designing treatments for eating disorders is the fact that psychiatric comorbidity is sufficiently common in these patients that comorbidity may be thought of as the rule rather than the exception. 10 This may, in part, explain the relatively low recovery rates in clinical trials of psychotherapy to date. Once the efficacy of the emerging psychotherapies reviewed here has been established, further studies examining effectiveness in real world samples will be crucial. Taken together, these facts suggest a need for alternative conceptualizations and novel treatments for eating disorders. This article reviews three new psychotherapeutic treatments for eating disorders: motivational enhancement for AN and BN, dialectical behavioral therapy for BN and BED, and Maudsley family treatment for adolescents with AN. For each treatment, we briefly describe the theory and techniques and then review existing data on treatment efficacy. Several additional psychotherapies, including guided imagery for BN 11 and self-psychology for AN and BN, 12 have received limited recent study; novel modes of therapy delivery, including guided self-help 13, 14 and e-mail, 15 have also been investigated. The three therapies reviewed here are, in the authors' view, representative of the promising new directions in which psychotherapeutic research for eating disorders is currently moving. 

eating disorders
anorexia nervosa
bulimia nervosa
binge eating disorder
psychotherapy
motivational enhancement therapy
dialectical behavioral therapy
mindfulness meditation
family treatment
