In this article, the second of a two-part series, the authors present information on the clinical assessment of individuals with paraphilias and hypersexual disorders. They review ethical considerations in the assessment and treatment of individuals with paraphilias. The role of interview and subjective and objective instruments in the assessment of individuals with paraphilias and hypersexual disorders is discussed. The authors discuss the use of penile plethysmography or phallometry, polygraphy, and viewing time assessments. Risk assessment of sexual offenders is reviewed. The authors then discuss behavioral, environmental, and psychopharmacological treatments for paraphilias and hypersexual disorders. Cognitive-behavioral therapy appears to be the most effective nonpharmacological strategy. The authors describe cognitive-behavioral techniques for decreasing and/or controlling sexual urges (e.g., satiation, covert sensitization, fading, cognitive restructuring, victim empathy therapy) as well as methods for enhancing appropriate sexual interest and arousal (e.g., social skills training, assertiveness skills training, sex education, couples therapy). The authors also discuss the role of relapse prevention therapy and 12-step programs, as well as other nonbiological therapies such as surveillance networks. The importance of providing appropriate treatment for comorbid conditions (e.g., depression, substance abuse or dependence) is stressed. The authors then review psychopharmacological treatments, including serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SRIs) and antiandrogens, in particular, the use of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GNRH) agonists. SRIs have been studied in these disorders in an uncontrolled way and appear promising. Earlier antiandrogens (e.g., estrogen, progesterone, and cyproterone acetate) have demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of paraphilias. The newer GNRH agonists have the advantage over the earlier treatments of being available in long-acting depot formulations and having fewer side effects. Preliminary studies and case reports with these agents appear promising. Further study of both the SRIs and GNRH agonists in these disorders is needed. The article concludes with a treatment algorithm, in which the authors suggest beginning with less restrictive treatments (e.g., behavioral or verbal therapies), if possible, and moving to more restrictive alternatives (e.g., biological therapies, institutionalization) as needed. A guide for clinicians and patients about where and how to find appropriate clinicians and treatment resources in the United States is provided. 

paraphilias
sex offenders
hypersexual disorders
plethysmography
polygraphy
viewing time assessment
risk assessment
cognitive-behavioral therapy
12-step programs
serotonergic reuptake inhibitors
antiandrogens
LHRH agonists
