Research has shown that depression increases the likelihood that otherwise healthy people will develop ischemic heart disease (IHD) and worsens the prognosis of patients who already have IHD. Moreover, concerns about safety (e.g., cardiac side effects, drug-drug interactions) have caused physicians to be hesitant about using antidepressant agents in patients with IHD. This article is based on a recent roundtable of experts who met to discuss risk, diagnosis, and treatment options for depression in patients with IHD. This article reviews clinical and epidemiological studies that have described a link between depression and the subsequent development of IHD and have examined the role of depression as a predictor of cardiac events in patients with existing IHD. The article addresses the issue of whether depression can be safely and efficaciously treated both in patients with stable IHD and in those with acute coronary syndromes. The authors discuss safety issues related to the potential for interactions between antidepressants and cardiovascular medications, the use of nonpharmacologic treatment options such as psychosocial interventions, and the effect of antidepressant therapy on quality of life in patients with IHD. The article concludes with practical clinical guidance concerning the management of depression in patients who have recently experienced myocardial infarction. Although our understanding of the course of illness and risk factors associated with ischemic heart disease (IHD) has improved significantly over the past 3 decades, IHD continues to be the leading cause of mortality and disability in the western world. 1 Research clarifying the role of well-known, modifiable risk factors such as hypertension, hyperlipidemia, diabetes, smoking, excessive body weight, and physical inactivity has led to improved patient outcomes and to substantial improvements in the prognosis of IHD. Research has also identified an important link between depression and IHD. Depression increases the likelihood that otherwise healthy people will develop IHD, and worsens the prognosis of patients who already have IHD. 2,3 Depression exacerbates the course of numerous comorbid diseases, but its effect on IHD is particularly dramatic. 4 However, depression is often overlooked when comorbid with IHD because the physiological effects of IHD overlap with symptoms of depression, and the symptoms of major depression are often relatively mild in patients with IHD. 4,5 Furthermore, because diagnosis of depression involves self-reporting, a patient with both conditions often overlooks depression symptoms or attributes them to cardiovascular episodes. For patients who already have IHD, better recognition and treatment of depression can improve their mood and quality of life. Unfortunately, safety concerns have left physicians hesitant to use antidepressant agents in these vulnerable patients. 6 A roundtable of experts met recently to address issues of risk, diagnosis, and treatment options for depression in patients with IHD and the proceedings of this meeting are highlighted in this review. This article reviews clinical and epidemiological studies that have described a link between depression and the subsequent development of IHD and examined the role of depression as a predictor of cardiac events in patients with existing IHD. The question of whether depression can be safely and efficaciously treated in patients with IHD is addressed, and the needs of patients with stable IHD and acute coronary syndromes are considered. Topics include safety issues related to the potential for interactions between antidepressants and cardiovascular medications, the use of non-pharmacologic treatment options such as psychosocial interventions, and the effect of antidepressant therapy on quality of life in patients with IHD. The article concludes with practical clinical guidance concerning the management of depression in patients who have recently experienced a myocardial infarction (MI). 

ischemic heart disease
cardiovascular illness
depression
antidepressants
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
sertraline
fluoxetine
paroxetine
tricyclic antidepressants
bupropion
venlafaxine
psychosocial treatment
cognitive-behavioral therapy
