The original Expert Consensus Guidelines on the Treatment of Bipolar Disorder were published in 1996. Since that time, a variety of new treatments for bipolar disorder have been reported; however, evidence for these treatments varies widely, with data especially limited regarding comparisons between treatments and how to sequence them. For this reason, a new survey of expert opinion was undertaken to bridge gaps between the research evidence and key clinical decisions. The results of this new survey, which was completed by 58 experts, are presented in The Expert Consensus Guideline Series: Medication Treatment of Bipolar Disorder 2000, which was published in April 2000 as a Postgraduate Medicine Special Report. In this article, the authors describe the methodology used in the survey and summarize the clinical recommendations given in the resulting guidelines. The expert panel reached consensus on many key strategies, including acute and preventive treatment of mania (euphoric, mixed, and dysphoric subtypes), depression, rapid cycling, and approaches to managing treatment resistance and comorbid psychiatric conditions. Use of a mood stabilizer is recommended in all phases of treatment. Divalproex (especially for mixed or dysphoric subtypes) and lithium are the primary mood stabilizers for both acute and preventive treatment of mania. If monotherapy with these agents fails, the next recommended intervention is to combine them. This combination of lithium and divalproex can then serve as the foundation to which other medications are added if needed. Carbamazepine is the leading alternative mood stabilizer for mania. The experts rated the other new anticonvulsants as second-line options (i.e., their use is recommended if lithium, divalproex, and carbamazepine fail or are contraindicated). For milder depression, a mood stabilizer, especially lithium, may be used as monotherapy. Divalproex and lamotrigine are other first-line choices. For more severe depression, the experts recommend combining a standard antidepressant with lithium or divalproex. Bupropion, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), and venlafaxine are preferred antidepressants. The antidepressants should usually be tapered 2-6 months after remission. Monotherapy with divalproex is recommended for the initial treatment of either depression or mania in rapid-cycling bipolar disorder. Antipsychotics are recommended for use in combination with the above regimens for mania or depression with psychosis, and as potential adjuncts in nonpsychotic episodes. Atypical antipsychotics, especially olanzapine and risperidone, were generally preferred over conventional antipsychotics. The guidelines also include recommendations concerning the use of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), clozapine, thyroid hormone, stimulants, and various novel agents for patients with treatment-refractory bipolar illness. The experts reached high levels of consensus on key steps in treating bipolar disorder despite obvious gaps in high-quality data. To evaluate many of the treatment options in this survey, the experts had to extrapolate beyond controlled data; however, their recommendations are generally conservative. Experts give their strongest support to initial strategies and medications for which high-quality research data or longstanding patterns of clinical usage exist. Within the limits of expert opinion and with the understanding that new research data may take precedence, these guidelines provide clear pathways for addressing common clinical questions and can be used to inform clinicians and educate patients about the relative merits of a variety of interventions. 

bipolar disorder
mania
depression
rapid cycling
mood stabilizers
lithium
divalproex
antidepressants
antipsychotics
expert consensus treatment guidelines
