The author discusses the difficulties involved in treating patients with borderline personality disorder and concomitant Cluster B-narcissistic, histrionic, and/or antisocial-personality traits or disorders. He presents eight vignettes of patients with borderline personality disorder combined with various types of Cluster B personality traits or disorders and describes the course of their treatment. The author posits that such patients fall on a continuum ranging from difficult to treat but still treatable, to those with strong narcissistic or even psychopathic traits whose illness fails to improve no matter what treatment methods are applied (i.e., they have untreatable illness). Patients with borderline personality disorder (BPD), as defined by the <em>Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition</em> (DSM-IV), 1 are among the most challenging group from the standpoint of treatability by current psychotherapeutic or pharmacological approaches. In a way, it is tautological to categorize borderline patients as difficult, since it was the very difficulty of treating certain patients that led, years ago, to the creation of the label borderline in the first place. For example, Colson et al. 2 described a number of inpatients at the Menninger Institute as difficult because they demonstrated certain attributes that made them less readily amenable to conventional psychotherapeutic techniques. These attributes-character pathology, withdrawn psychoticism, poor impulse control, and suicidal/depressed behavior-turn out to be closely allied to the characteristics we now embrace under the rubric of BPD. The same can be said for the set of clinical features highlighted by Adolph Stern in his groundbreaking paper of the late 1930s, 3 in which he drew attention to a subgroup of psychoanalytic patients who did not improve in the customary 2-4 year timeframe of analysis. Instead, these patients showed sticky libido-in the sense that they could not seem to detach themselves gradually from the dependency upon the analyst the way ordinary analytic patients could. Also, they were more severely symptomatic (depressed, suicidal, phobic), had weak egos, and were prone to endless acting out of the transference. Both Stern's original descriptions of borderline patients and Colson's list of difficult attributes were vague and bear only an imprecise relationship to our contemporary concept of BPD. Taking Colson's list for the moment, one might say that all BPD patients are difficult, but not all difficult (à la Colson) patients show BPD. The more modern psychoanalytic definition of borderline, promulgated by Kernberg, 4 is more precise than the descriptions of either Stern or Colson, yet still traces a territory upon the map of all psychiatric disorders that is broader than that of DSM's BPD. Kernberg's borderline personality organization, the defining qualities of which are a weak sense of self (identity diffusion), coupled with an adequate reality testing capacity, encompasses all of BPD, along with other conditions that would not come under the BPD heading. The more popular approaches now in use for treating patients with BPD are psychoanalytically-oriented psychotherapy, cognitive-behavioral therapy, and supportive therapy. Each is known by a variety of names. For the former, Kernberg uses the term transference-focused psychotherapy (TFP), 5,6 whereas Gunderson speaks of exploratory psychotherapy.7,8 Linehan's dialectic behavioral therapy (DBT) 9 is a now widely employed form of cognitive-behavioral therapy. Supportive psychotherapy 10 utilizes techniques (e.g., ventilation, admonition, limit-setting, exhortation) that are at times used in almost any therapeutic program designed for patients with BPD, especially at the outset and during crises. For many patients with BPD, especially at the beginning of treatment, various psychopharmacological agents are often added to the regimen: these include mood-stabilizers, antidepressants, anxiolytics, and antipsychotic medications, depending upon the symptom picture. 11 It is a near-universal phenomenon that patients diagnosed with BPD also show traits of other personality disorders 12 as well as the symptoms of one or another Axis I condition. 13 All of this makes for considerable non-uniformity in the clinical pictures of any sizeable group of BPD patients. As one expression of this non-uniformity, the complexities and difficulties of treating BPD patients are likewise non-uniform. One can indeed construct a bell curve where the easiest of the BPD patients can be positioned at one end and those least amenable to current approaches at the other. Such a curve would in actuality not have the classical gaussian shape, because there exists, beyond the outliers at the most-difficult end, a subgroup of BPD patients who fail to improve no matter what methods are applied to their treatment. I alluded to such a subgroup in an earlier work. 14 Even here, not all of the next-to-impossible and impossibly difficult BPD patients resemble one another. We could subdivide these difficult borderline patients according to their accompanying personality features, taking note of research showing that comorbidity with almost all the other personality disorders, with the exception of schizoid personality disorder, is common within the BPD domain. 12 The most common fellow travelers are other Cluster-B disorders: narcissistic, histrionic, and antisocial. Rather than dwell on all of the possible combinations that one may encounter at this <em>border of treatability</em>, I will describe several borderline patients with concomitant Cluster-B traits who posed the greatest challenges to treatment. Their names and other identifying features have been altered to safeguard confidentiality. The <em>narcissistic</em> traits of patients 2-8 are outlined in <a href="javascript:void(0);" onclick="javascript:showSlideShowByImageID('TT1');" onmouseover="javascript:ImageWrapperControl_ShowRollOverImage('Table 1', 'Table 1. Distribution of narcissistic traits among the patients with comorbid borderline and narcissistic personality disorders (BPD + NPD)*Terry showed narcissistic traits only; the others met full DSM-IV criteria for NPD (i.e., they met 5 or more criteria for NPD)', 'http://images.journals.lww.com/practicalpsychiatry/Rollover.00131746-200307000-00003.TT1.jpeg', '400')" onmouseout="javascript:ImageWrapperControl_ImageMouseOut()">Table 1</a>. 

borderline personality disorder
histrionic personality disorder
narcissistic personality disorder
antisocial personality disorder
psychotherapy
psychopharmacology
