The association between elevated prolactin levels and conventional antipsychotics is well-established. The novel antipsychotic, risperidone, has also been shown to elevate prolactin levels. Patients undergoing treatment with these medications are at high risk for developing hyperprolactinemia, which is associated with decreased bone mineral density, osteoporosis, menstrual disruptions and infertility, galactorrhea, breast cancer, cardiovascular disorders, and sexual impairment. Patients treated with conventional antipsychotics and risperidone should be routinely screened for hyperprolactinemia, and monitored for known sequelae. Optimally, patients with hyperprolactinemia secondary to antipsychotic drug treatment should be switched to a prolactin-sparing antipsychotic. This review will briefly highlight the regulation and function of prolactin secretion, discuss clinical effects of antipsychotic-induced hyperprolactinemia, and suggest a course of treatment. Patients treated with conventional (typical) antipsychotics and the atypical antipsychotic risperidone are at risk for developing hyperprolactinemia. These antipsychotic medications, through their acute and chronic dopamine blocking actions, have been shown to significantly elevate prolactin (PRL) levels-above the normal level for men (0.8 nmol/ml or 18.77 ng/ml) and especially for women (1.05 nmol/ml or 24.20 ng/ml). 1-3 Elevated PRL levels have profound clinical implications over the short- and long-term, and are associated with decreased bone mineral density, osteoporosis, disrupted menstrual cycles and infertility, galactorrhea, breast cancer, cardiovascular disorders, and sexual impairment. Until very recently, antipsychotic-induced hyperprolactinemia received little attention in the medical literature. 4-6 The vast majority of research conducted on hyperprolactinemia focused on tumors, renal insufficiency, and hypothyroidism as major precipitating factors. 6 Hyperprolactinemia in patients with schizophrenia is significant because schizophrenia affects at least 1% of the total world population (approximately 60 million people worldwide) and is ranked by the World Health Organization (WHO) as one of the top ten disorders in terms of causing the highest cumulative disability and lost human productive years. 7,8 Hyperprolactinemia is quite prevalent in individuals with schizophrenia. A recent multicenter prospective assessment of 402 inpatients and outpatients meeting DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, or schizophreniform disorder reported a high prevalence of hyperprolactinemia among women of reproductive age (65.6%) and postmenopausal women (45.1%). 1 Among male patients, the prevalence of hyperprolactinemia was 42.4%. These rates are considerably higher than those in the general population and among women with reproductive disorders. Women had 2.6 times the odds of developing hyperprolactinemia compared with men, and women of reproductive age had 2.3 times the odds compared with postmenopausal women. In this study, the prevalence rate of hyperprolactinemia among females taking risperidone was significantly higher than the rate among women taking conventional antipsychotics (88% versus 47.6%). Another recent study found a significant positive association between elevated PRL levels and antipsychotic dosage among male and especially among female patients with schizophrenia. 6 Because schizophrenia affects many different aspects of patients' social relations and functions, a condition such as hyperprolactinemia that may worsen patients' social relationships and interactions and contribute to physical disability is of prime clinical importance. 6 This review, will briefly highlight the regulation and function of PRL secretion, discuss clinical effects of antipsychotic-induced hyperprolactinemia, and suggest a course of treatment. Readers are also referred to a number of other recent publications on this topic by the authors. 1,2,9-11 

hyperprolactinemia
schizophrenia
prolactin
antipsychotics
conventional antipsychotics
risperidone
osteoporosis
