Objective. Neuropsychiatric symptoms are common in patients with chronic hepatitis C (CHC) and can potentially be exacerbated by interferon-alpha treatment. Such symptoms can contribute to problems with treatment adherence, which can significantly compromise epidemiological virus control. This review summarizes current knowledge about the etiology, course, and management of neuropsychiatric symptoms in patients with CHC. Method. Studies were identified using computerized searches, with further references obtained from the bibliographies of the reviewed articles. Results. Psychopathological syndromes that occur during interferon-alpha treatment frequently have atypical features that may complicate their recognition using standard diagnostic criteria. In addition, prospective studies in this area often exclude patients with psychiatric disorders and have methodological disparities that make it difficult to develop guidelines for management of psychiatric side effects induced by interferon-alpha. Despite the high prevalence of chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection in patients with psychiatric and substance use disorders, neu-ropsychiatric concerns often lead to the exclusion of such patients from interferon-alpha treatment, inappropriately depriving them of the potential benefits of this therapy. Conclusion. Consultation-liaison psychiatrists should become familiar with the clinical spectrum of presentations associated with HCV infection as well as with related neuropsychiatric symptoms in order to promote the creation of multidiscipli-nary teams who specialize in the care of patients with HCV infections. More studies are needed to define neuropsychiatric syndromes that can be induced by interferon-alpha and to clarify best assessment and treatment procedures for these syndromes. It is also important to create and evaluate psychoeducational programs for all patients with chronic HCV infections, even those with low risk of complications, in order to promote adherence to therapy and optimize patients' quality of life. (<em>Journal of Psychiatric Practice</em> 2009;15:262-281). 

hepatitis C
interferon-alpha
consultation-liaison psychiatry
neuropsychiatric syndromes
depression
psychiatric disorders
substance use disorders
