Objective: No articles, chapters, or texts have been published in the last 5 years that detail a workable model of inpatient psychiatric treatment based on current, drastically changed realities. Methods: We reviewed controlled studies on inpatient psychiatric care and pooled our clinical experience from two academic inpatient units and a Veterans Affairs inpatient unit. Results: Major changes in systems of care, the population now being hospitalized, the emphasis on practicing evidence-based medicine, and decreased funding of inpatient psychiatric units have necessitated changes in the traditional paradigm of inpatient treatment. We describe the functions that an inpatient unit performs best and detail 1) objectives of treatment with an emphasis on the focal problem, and 2) the specific treatment interventions, treatment team members, and outpatient links necessary to maximize post-hospital outcome for patient and family. Conclusion: Given current realities, the treatment paradigm that we recommend has evolved from an asylum-like long-stay model to one that is more like a medical-surgical intensive care unit with an emphasis on rapid diagnosis, psychopharmacological intervention, and laying the groundwork for effective outpatient management. In consequence, the expected clinical outcomes from an episode of inpatient psychiatric treatment are quite different from those of the recent past. In the 1950s, short-term psychiatric hospitalization- evolving from an asylum-model-referred to hospital stays of less than 1 year. During the 1980s, the average length of short-term psychiatric hospitalization decreased from 1 month to 2 weeks; it is now down to 3-10 days. At the same time, the number of admissions has risen steadily, as has the severity of illness of the patients admitted to inpatient psychiatry units. 1 As a consequence, patient turnover has increased, 2 creating an informal consensus among clinicians (although this has not been precisely documented) that acuity of illness on the inpatient unit has increased very significantly. This perception is supported by the greater severity of illness required to qualify for hospitalization, the narrower range of severity (with most hospitalized patients very dysfunctional and severe and decreasing numbers of less severe patients), and the greater severity of illness at the time of discharge. In fact, most patients are now discharged in a condition that would have led to their hospitalization a decade ago! The situation has grown still more complicated over the past year or two, as indicated by findings in the latest 2002 report from the National Association of Psychiatric Health Systems (NAPHS), which show an increase in length of stay (LOS) and the highest occupancy rates in a decade. 3 In part, this is due to a failure of outpatient care and a collapse in community services, which have made follow-up care more difficult to find and fund. As a result, emergency rooms are in gridlock and inpatient beds in short supply as LOS rises for the short-stay group. Even as inpatient acuity has increased, funding and staffing have either remained unchanged or, more commonly, have actually decreased. 4,5 These developments have compounded the problem of defining the appropriate structure and function of inpatient psychiatric units today. In the context of a crumbling mental health delivery system,5 the precise role of the inpatient unit in the continuum of psychiatric care has become increasingly unclear. 4 Clinicians, payers and utilization reviewers, and patients and their families all appear dissatisfied with the present role of the inpatient unit-albeit for different reasons. Inpatient psychiatrists and other team members are demoralized because they believe that the ultra-short lengths of stay, excessive utilization review, and documentation burden markedly diminish their therapeutic utility and clinical value. Utilization reviewers and payers concur and interpret these problems as proof of their contention that inpatient treatment represents a <em>failure</em> and not a therapeutic opportunity. If we continue to calculate costs as we currently do, then hospitalization represents the most expensive component of overall direct treatment costs for major psychiatric illness. Accordingly, capitated and noncapitated managed care systems view hospitalization as the biggest threat to their fiscal stability and try to prevent hospitalization at all costs. Inpatient treatment is at best a necessary evil and we need fewer inpatient beds, fewer inpatient days& goes their refrain, a message that is not unique to psychiatry. Hospital management has responded by closing an increasing number of money-losing psychiatric beds, with whole psychiatric units shutting down. In the midst of this, patients and their families are confused about what to expect, as individual patients continue to cycle in and out of the inpatient unit. Although many providers and patients have found the current inpatient situation difficult to adapt to and some feel that current inpatient treatment is a failure, this view fails to recognize that there are also certain positive aspects to the changes that have occurred. As this article will describe, a new paradigm of inpatient care has the potential to offer patients quality care within the constraints of the current healthcare delivery system, albeit with different goals. Because of the forces described above, the standard of care for acute psychiatric treatment is in flux and goals are scaled down. The major challenge for the clinician is to change paradigms in order to create objectives for hospitalization that are realistic and allow for fiscal solvency 4 but guidelines are few. Controlled studies of different models of hospitalization are no longer funded as they were in the 1970s and 1980s. 6 Likewise, many early private psychiatric inpatient units, such as the Institute for Living, the Menninger Clinic, and the Payne Whitney Clinic, which were the forerunners of small acute services, are mostly either dramatically changed or no longer in business (although a few long-term treatment facilities, such as the Austen-Riggs Center remain). The treatment model used in these hospitals, which was heavy on psychosocial intervention and rehabilitation and relatively light on medication, is no longer as relevant given the changes that have taken place in the system. The guidelines for treatment planning from the Joint Commission on the Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) are more administrative than clinical and most practice guidelines and algorithms are based on the disorder and are not specific to the inpatient setting. The only model in the current literature is presented in the 1997 Sederer and Rothschild classic text on acute care psychiatry. 7 That text includes a chapter on triage and acute intervention, but has no summary of acute inpatient work in the context of current realities. In this article, we share our collective experience from three different short-stay (7-10 day) psychiatric units from across the country and describe how they have adapted to this seemingly grim set of circumstances. Two of these units are in academic settings and one is a Veterans Affairs unit. We also reviewed controlled studies on inpatient psychiatric care. As we see it, the model has changed from an asylum model (in the absence of effective therapies) to a model that is more like that of a modern medical-surgical intensive care unit, with rapid diagnosis and psychopharmacological intervention as its foundation. While most patients will be acutely stabilized and discharged within 3-10 days, there is a bimodal curve in length of stay so that approximately 20% of patients have a length of stay of 14-21 days. These are often the patients referred from the emergency room who, because of symptom acuity, treatment resistance, or unsafe alternatives in the community, require longer lengths of stay. The issue is how to modify inpatient psychiatry to meet the needs of both groups. Accordingly, we present such a model and guidelines for clinicians. Although no single component in this model is dramatically new or different, the overall model-which might be described as a theory and practice package-is relatively unique. This article addresses the following questions:  * What does an inpatient unit do best?  * What needs can it meet?  * What alternatives, if any, can serve those needs?  * If there are useful functions that the inpatient unit must serve, how can that be optimally done in the current environment? After articulating our view of the role the inpatient unit should play in the continuum of mental health services, we describe an approach that might facilitate fulfillment of this role. We then articulate a strategy for formulating individualized inpatient objectives based on answers to two of the questions listed above: What can an inpatient unit do best? and What needs can it meet? The model is presented chronologically-from admission through discharge-just as a clinician faces these challenges. 

inpatient psychiatric treatment
outpatient psychiatric treatment
treatment objectives
length of stay
crisis care
detoxification
family interventions
psychopharmacology. follow-up planning
documentation
