The neurobiological basis of violence and antisocial behavior is poorly understood. Lesion studies have implicated the frontal and temporal lobes in such phenomena. Recent neuroimaging studies have provided more detailed information on the neurobiological correlates of violence and antisocial behavior. Moreover, the results of such imaging studies extend findings from prior lesion studies. These results suggest that violent and antisocial behavior is associated with disruptions in frontotemporal neural systems. This article reviews the neuroimaging literature on violence and antisocial behavior and discusses the strengths and weaknesses of the different methods that have been used in such studies. The author reviews findings from cerebral psychophysiology studies (electroencephalographic studies and evoked potentials), as well as from studies using positron emission tomography (PET), single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The article concludes with a discussion of useful directions for future research. It is clear that the use of neuroimaging methods in combination offers the greatest promise for progress in the understanding of the neural basis of violence and antisocial behavior. Violence is an important social problem. Violence in the community has obvious social relevance for the political, criminal justice, and health care systems. Moreover, violence in the mentally ill can be viewed as an important medical and mental health problem with significant implications for clinical care and mental health economics. Although the rate of violent behavior in the community is not much higher in patients with schizophrenia than in healthy controls, that rate is substantially higher in patients with comorbid schizophrenia and substance abuse. 1 A high proportion of psychiatric patients, especially those in state psychiatric facilities, have such comorbidity. These patients represent a group at high risk for violence. An understanding of the neural basis of impulsive and aggressive behavior would thus have important social and clinical implications. Violence is typically defined as behavior intended to cause harm. It exists in many forms, including societal violence (e.g., war). For the purpose of this review, we will limit our discussion to interpersonal violence and crime with a violent basis. The neurobiological aspects of violence are beginning to be understood. 2 It is clear that many neurobiological causes and correlates exist, and that these interact both with each other and with nonneurobiological factors. In addition, some of the posited causes of violence, such as impulsivity, psychopathy, and fear-processing deficits, involve brain regions that have been associated with violence. Dysfunction in the frontal and temporal lobes has been associated with violent behavior 3-6 (see Volavka 2002 2 for a review). Neuroimaging studies of violent and antisocial behaviors are limited in scope and number, but they similarly implicate prefrontal and subcortical circuitry. 7,8 In this article, I review the literature on neuroimaging of violence with a focus on more recently developed techniques; I describe cerebral psychophysiology studies (electroencephalographic [EEG] studies and evoked potentials), as well as studies using positron emission tomography (PET), single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The review refers to both structural methods, in which neuroanatomical structures are measured, and functional methods, in which the activation of those structures in response to either a physiological or cognitive challenge is measured. 

neuroimaging
violence
impulsivity aggression
antisocial behavior
antisocial personality disorder
psychopathy
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
positron emission tomography (PET)
electroencephalogram (EEG)
