Understanding the etiology of schizophrenia has been a considerable challenge. The neurodevelopmental hypothesis has held sway in recent years, focusing our attention on biological causes acting in early life. Much evidence supports this hypothesis and risk factors operating in early life (e.g., obstetric complications) have been shown to be associated with the later development of schizophrenia. Indicators of abnormal neurodevelopment that characterize individuals vulnerable to later developing schizophrenia have also been identified. For example, as a group, children who will later develop schizophrenia subtly differ from their peers in terms of their motor, cognitive, and social functioning. However, there is much that cannot be explained in purely neurodevelopmental terms. There is growing evidence of associations between the risk of schizophrenia and factors such as drug misuse, ethnicity/migration, life events, and urbanicity. A multifactorial model of causation that encompasses biological, social, and psychological elements is arguably both a better representation of current research findings and a more appropriate model for clinical practice. The idea that certain types of insanity might have a developmental origin was commonplace in the late 19th century 1 but was subsequently lost for nearly 90 years. It was revived in the 1980s 2,3 and went on to become the dominant paradigm for understanding schizophrenia. However, it has become increasingly evident that aberrant neurodevelopment cannot explain all the known facts about the presentation and outcome of schizophrenia. Consequently, researchers have sought to understand what factors may have an impact on the developmentally impaired individual to precipitate and perpetuate psychosis. Some researchers have reverted to a quasi-Kraepelinian view in which the illness is seen as being an exclusively biological condition and the consequence of a secondary neuroregressive or degenerative process superimposed upon developmental abnormality. Others have turned to a multifactorial view of the illness and have focused more on the role of drug abuse and social factors in precipitating the illness, and how a cognitive style arises which facilitates the development of psychotic experiences and beliefs. It is this latter multifactorial model that we will present here. We believe that this model is of more practical help to the clinician who struggles to help his or her patient cope in the social world. Therefore, we will first discuss the role of genes and environmental factors that impinge on early development, before going on to describe what is known about the characteristics of preschizophrenic children. Then we will review the cascade of increasing deviance shown by such children, and how dopamine sensitization precipitates and mediates positive psychotic symptoms. Finally, we will consider the role of the social environment in setting the stage for psychotic thinking. 

schizophrenia
neurodevelopment
risk factors
psychosis
etiology
genetics
obstetric complications
brain imaging studies
cognitive abnormalities
neuromotor abnormalities
drug abuse
ethnicity
migration
